If, Else, Elif Statements
Conditional statements allow us to
perform different actions based
on different conditions.
The most common conditional Bash
statements include if, else, and elif.
The if statement is relatively simple.
It checks to see if a condition is true–
but it requires a very specific syntax.
Pay careful attention to this syntax,
especially the use of required spaces.
In this example, if “some test” evaluates
as true,
the script will “perform an action”,
or any commands between then and fi.
Let’s look at an actual example.
In this example, we use an if statement
to check the age entered by a user.
If the entered age is less than 16…
…the script will output a warning message.
Now let’s make this script executable
and try it out.
Great, our age check is working correctly.
The square brackets we used in the if
statement are
actually a reference to the test
command.
This means we can use all of the
operators
that are allowed by the test command.
Refer to your lab guide for a list of
some of the available operators.
With this in mind, our previous example
using if
can be rewritten without square brackets as follows.
Even though this example is functionally
equivalent to the one using
square brackets, the square brackets
make the code slightly easier to read.
We can also perform a certain set of
actions
if a statement is true and another set if
it is false.
To do this, we can use the else
statement, which has the following syntax.
Let’s extend our previous “age” example
to include the else statement.
In this script, if the entered age is 16
or over,
a welcome message will be displayed.
Let’s run this script and make sure it
works as expected.
Notice that the else statement was
executed when the entered age was
greater than (or more specifically “not
less than”) sixteen.
The if and else statements only allow two
code execution branches.
We can add additional branches with the
elif statement which uses this syntax.
Let’s extend our “age” example again to
include the elif statement.
In this example, the code execution flow
is slightly more complex.
In order of operation, the … then branch
executes if the entered age is less than
sixteen…
…the elif branch is entered
(and the “Hats off..” message displayed)
if the age is greater than sixty…
…and the else branch executes only if
the age
is greater than sixteen but less than
sixty.
Let’s try this latest script and see if
it works.
Great. Now we have a firm grasp on
conditional statements in Bash.